Add validation case val-2j: Tritium TDS from Li2TiO3 solid breeder (#402)
idaholab/TMAP8: doc/content/verification_and_validation/val-2j.md

# val-2j

# Tritium Thermal Desorption Spectroscopy from Li$_2$TiO$_3$ Solid Breeder

## Case Description

This validation case models tritium thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS) from neutron-irradiated Li$_2$TiO$_3$ (lithium titanate) crystalline grains, a candidate solid tritium breeding material for Deuterium-Tritium (D-T) fusion reactors. The experimental data and model are from [!cite](kobayashi2015developing).

> Li$_2$TiO$_3$ samples were irradiated at the Kyoto University Reactor (KUR) at various neutron fluences. After irradiation, the tritium release behavior was measured by TDS with a heating rate of 5 K/min using pure helium as the purge gas. The average grain radius was 1.5 $\mu$m.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Li$_2$TiO$_3$ samples were irradiated at the Kyoto University Reactor (KUR) at various neutron fluences. After irradiation, the tritium release behavior was measured by TDS with a heating rate of 5 K/min starting from 300 K using pure helium as the purge gas. The average grain radius was 1.5 $\mu$m.
```

Sample E (high defect density, $D_{id}$ = 0.018 defect/Li$_2$TiO$_3$) is modeled, where tritium release is significantly influenced by trapping at O$^{-}$-centers and defect annihilation.

## Model Description

### Diffusion of Mobile Species

TMAP8 simulates tritium diffusion and trapping in a single spherical grain of Li$_2$TiO$_3$ using 1D spherical coordinates (`coord_type = RSPHERICAL`). The governing equation for mobile tritium concentration $C$ is [!citep](kobayashi2015developing):

\begin{equation} \label{eq:diffusion_trapping}
\frac{\partial C}{\partial t} = D \left( \frac{\partial^2 C}{\partial r^2} + \frac{2}{r} \frac{\partial C}{\partial r} \right) - \frac{\partial C_T}{\partial t},
\end{equation}

where $C_T$ is the concentration of trapped tritium in O$^{-}$-centers, $D$ is the temperature-dependent diffusivity following the Arrhenius law:

\begin{equation} \label{eq:diffusivity}
D = D_0 \exp \left( -\frac{E_d}{k_B T} \right),
\end{equation}

> where $D_0$ is the pre-exponential factor, $E_d$ is the activation energy, $k_B$ is the Boltzmann constant, and $T$ is temperature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $D_0$ is the pre-exponential factor, $E_d$ is the activation energy, $k_B$ is the Boltzmann constant, and $T$ is the temperature.
```

### Trapping and Detrapping

> Only O$^{-}$-center (hydroxyl group) trapping is included in this model. As noted by [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) (p. 26), tritium release controlled by detrapping from F$^+$-centers (oxygen vacancies) occurs near 580 K, which corresponds to the release temperature controlled by the diffusion process itself. Because F$^+$-center detrapping is not rate-limiting relative to diffusion, it does not produce a distinct feature in the TDS spectrum, and is therefore excluded from the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only O$^{-}$-center (hydroxyl group) trapping is included in this model. As noted by [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) (p. 26), tritium release controlled by detrapping from F$^+$-centers (oxygen vacancies) occurs near 580 K, which corresponds to the release temperature controlled by the diffusion process itself. Because F$^+$-center detrapping is not rate-limiting relative to diffusion, it does not produce a distinct feature (i.e., peak) in the TDS spectrum, and is therefore excluded from the model.
```

The trapped concentration $C_T$ evolves according to:

\begin{equation}  \label{eq:trapping}

> \frac{\partial C_T}{\partial t} = \alpha_t \frac{C_T^{\text{empty}} C_M}{N} - \alpha_r C_T

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\frac{\partial C_T}{\partial t} = \alpha_t \frac{C_T^{\text{empty}} C_M}{N} - \alpha_r C_T,
```

\end{equation}

where $N$ is the lattice site density, and $C_T^{\text{empty}} = \chi N - C_T$ is the empty trap concentration with $\chi$ being the trap site fraction.

The trapping and detrapping rate coefficients follow Arrhenius relationships:

\begin{equation} \label{eq:trapping_rate}

> \alpha_t = \alpha_{t0} \exp\left(-\frac{\epsilon_t}{k_B T}\right)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\alpha_t = \alpha_{t0} \exp\left(-\frac{\epsilon_t}{k_B T}\right),
```

\end{equation}

\begin{equation} \label{eq:detrapping_rate}

> \alpha_r = \alpha_{r0} \exp\left(-\frac{\epsilon_r}{k_B T}\right)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\alpha_r = \alpha_{r0} \exp\left(-\frac{\epsilon_r}{k_B T}\right),
```

\end{equation}

> where $\alpha_{t0}$ and $\alpha_{r0}$ are pre-factors of trapping and release rate coefficients, $\epsilon_t$ and $\epsilon_r$ are trapping and release energies, and $k_B$ is the Boltzmann constant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $\alpha_{t0}$ and $\alpha_{r0}$ are pre-factors of trapping and release rate coefficients, $\epsilon_t$ and $\epsilon_r$ are the trapping and release energies, and $k_B$ is the Boltzmann constant.
```

### Defect annihilation

During TDS heating, radiation-induced defect sites undergo first-order annihilation [!citep](kobayashi2015developing):

\begin{equation} \label{eq:annihilation}
\frac{d D_{id}}{dt} = -k_{dp-da} \, D_{id},
\end{equation}

> where $D_{id}$ is defect density. The trap site fraction $\chi$ is related to radiation defect density $D_{id}$. However, the exact relationship haven't been indicated in [!citep](kobayashi2015developing). Therefore, the initial trap site fraction is assumed to equal the defect density with $\chi(0) = D_{id}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $D_{id}$ is the defect density. The trap site fraction $\chi$ is related to radiation defect density $D_{id}$. However, the exact relationship is not clearly indicated in [!citep](kobayashi2015developing). Therefore, the initial trap site density is assumed to equal the defect density with $\chi(0)N = D_{id}$.
```
A fraction should not be equal to a density.

> The annihilation rate coefficient, k_{dp-da}, is described as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The annihilation rate coefficient, $k_{dp-da}$, is described as:
```

\begin{equation} \label{eq:annihilation_rate}
k_{dp-da} = k_{dp-da,0} \exp \left( -\frac{E_{dp-da}}{k_B T} \right).
\end{equation}

The raising temperature reduces the available trap sites: the trap site fraction $\chi$ decays over time following [eq:annihilation], preventing re-trapping into annihilated sites. This is implemented by solving the annihilation equation self-consistently as an additional variable within the simulation, using a `ReleasingNodalKernel`.

### Boundary and initial conditions

- $\partial C / \partial r = 0$ at $r = 0$ (symmetry at grain center)
- $C = 0$ at $r = r_g$ (fast surface release, [!cite](kobayashi2015developing))

> The mobile and trapped tritium concentrations are initialized at their local trapping/detrapping equilibrium values at the starting temperature $T_{\text{start}}$ = 300 K. The equilibrium mobile concentration is computed from the balance of trapping and detrapping rates. This avoids an initial transient from any imbalance between trapping and detrapping. Since TDS output is normalized to arbitrary units, only the shape of the release curve matters, not the absolute concentrations. The temperature increases linearly at 5 K/min from 300 K.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mobile and trapped tritium concentrations are initialized at their local trapping/detrapping equilibrium values at the starting temperature $T_{\text{start}}$ = 300 K. The equilibrium mobile concentration is computed from the balance of trapping and detrapping rates. This avoids an initial transient from any imbalance between trapping and detrapping. 
Since the TDS output is normalized to arbitrary units, only the shape of the release curve matters, not the absolute concentrations.
```

## Case and Model Parameters

> !table id=val-2j_parameters caption=Values of model parameters.

Reviewer: This table must be referenced in the text.

> | Parameter | Description | Value | Units | Reference |

Reviewer: Provide kb value

| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| $r_g$ | Grain radius | 1.5 | $\mu$m | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) |
| $D_0$ | Diffusivity pre-exponential | 6.9 $\times 10^{-7}$ | m$^2$/s | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 11 |
| $E_d$ | Diffusion activation energy | 1.07 | eV | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 11 |
| $\alpha_{r0}$ | detrapping prefactor | 4.1 $\times 10^{6}$ | s$^{-1}$ | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 13 |
| $\epsilon_r$ | detrapping energy | 1.19 | eV | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 13 |
| $\alpha_{t0}$ | Trapping prefactor | 4.2 $\times 10^{8}$ | s$^{-1}$ | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 21 |
| $\epsilon_t$ | Trapping energy | 1.04 | eV | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 21 |
| $k_{dp-da,0}$ | Annihilation prefactor | 1.0 $\times 10^{2}$ | s$^{-1}$ | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 18 |
| $E_{dp-da}$ | Annihilation energy | 0.9 | eV | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 18 |
| $N$ | Lattice density | 1.88 $\times 10^{28}$ | m$^{-3}$ | Calculated |
| $\beta$ | TDS heating rate | 5 | K/min | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) |

> | $D_{id,E}$ | Defect fraction (Sample E) | 0.018 | - | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Table 1 |

Reviewer: This is here defined as a fraction, but was first introduced as a density. Make sure to be consistent.

## Results

### Results before optimization

[val-2j_comparison_e] shows the comparison between TMAP8 and the experimental TDS spectrum for Sample E (high defect density). The O$^{-}$-center trapping model with defect annihilation captures the broad release profile. The high detrapping energy of O$^{-}$-centers (1.19 eV) produces a release peak above 650 K that is distinct from the diffusion-controlled release. The defect annihilation mechanism reduces the effective trap density at high temperatures, suppressing re-trapping and allowing tritium to escape more efficiently.

> !media comparison_val-2j.py

Reviewer: y axis should start at 0.

       image_name=val-2j_comparison_sample_e.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2j_comparison_e
       caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculation with the experimental TDS data for Sample E (high defect density).

### Results after optimization

> The agreement between the TMAP8 simulation and experimental data can be improved by optimizing the model parameters using [MOOSE's stochastic tools module](https://mooseframework.inl.gov/modules/stochastic_tools/index.html). A Bayesian optimization approach [!citep](DHULIPALA2026102776) was applied to optimize six key parameters, three Arrhenius pre-exponential factors (in log$_{10}$ space) and three activation energies, to the experimental TDS curve for Sample E. The optimization used Gaussian Process active learning with Expected Improvement acquisition, running 40 iterations with 5 parallel proposals per iteration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The agreement between the TMAP8 simulation and experimental data can be improved by optimizing the model parameters using [MOOSE's stochastic tools module](https://mooseframework.inl.gov/modules/stochastic_tools/index.html). A Bayesian optimization approach [!citep](DHULIPALA2026102776) was applied to optimize six key parameters (i.e., three Arrhenius pre-exponential factors (in log$_{10}$ space) and three activation energies) to better match the experimental TDS curve for Sample E. The optimization used Gaussian Process active learning with Expected Improvement acquisition, running 40 iterations with 5 parallel proposals per iteration.
```

[val-2j_optimized_parameters] compares the reference values from [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) with the Bayesian-optimized parameters.

> !table id=val-2j_optimized_parameters caption=Reference and Bayesian-optimized parameter values.

Reviewer: Why not also fit the defect annihilation parameters? This might help improve the last part of the peak.

Author: The reason is that the annihilation effect has a limited impact on the final results. As shown in the figure, varying $\alpha_{anneal}$ from 0 to $1 \times 10^4$ results in only minor changes in the tritium release curve. Therefore, to simplify the optimization, I considered only six input parameters.

<img width="1763" height="1456" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/75e9e7f2-78ab-48e1-92c2-9416dde30a81" />

Reviewer: I think you should mention it in the text that it was found not to have a strong influence. 
I am surprised to see it didn't have much impact. 
Also, I though I had requested a plot of the evolution of the amount of defects during TDS. Could you add it?

Author: Okay, I have added the description and figure to the first paragraph at "Results after optimization" subsection.

| Parameter | Reference | Optimized | Units |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

> | $D_0$ | 6.9 $\times 10^{-7}$ | 5.82 $\times 10^{-5}$ | m$^2$/s |

Reviewer: The diffusion prefactor seem to change quite a bit. In addition to the table, maybe plot the diffusivity and trapping and release parameters to compare them around the relevant temperature ranges.

| $E_d$ | 1.07 | 1.15 | eV |
| $\alpha_{t0}$ | 4.2 $\times 10^{8}$ | 1.02 $\times 10^{8}$ | s$^{-1}$ |
| $\epsilon_t$ | 1.04 | 0.99 | eV |
| $\alpha_{r0}$ | 4.1 $\times 10^{6}$ | 1.91 $\times 10^{5}$ | s$^{-1}$ |
| $\epsilon_r$ | 1.19 | 1.09 | eV |

[val-2j_comparison_optimized] shows the comparison between TMAP8 with the optimized parameters and the experimental data. The optimized parameters significantly reduce the RMSPE compared to the reference parameters, demonstrating improved agreement with the experimental TDS spectrum.

> !media comparison_val-2j.py

Reviewer: y axis should start at 0.

Sample E (high defect density, $D_{id}$ = $3.384 \times 10^{26}$ m$^{-3}$, corresponding to 0.018 defect/Li$_2$TiO$_3$) is modeled, where tritium release is significantly influenced by trapping at O$^{-}$-centers and defect annihilation.

## Model Description

### Diffusion of Mobile Species

TMAP8 simulates tritium diffusion and trapping in a single spherical grain of Li$_2$TiO$_3$ using 1D spherical coordinates (`coord_type = RSPHERICAL`). The governing equation for mobile tritium concentration $C$ is [!citep](kobayashi2015developing):

\begin{equation} \label{eq:diffusion_trapping}
\frac{\partial C}{\partial t} = D \left( \frac{\partial^2 C}{\partial r^2} + \frac{2}{r} \frac{\partial C}{\partial r} \right) - \frac{\partial C_T}{\partial t},
\end{equation}

where $C_T$ is the concentration of trapped tritium in O$^{-}$-centers, $D$ is the temperature-dependent diffusivity following the Arrhenius law:

\begin{equation} \label{eq:diffusivity}
D = D_0 \exp \left( -\frac{E_d}{k_B T} \right),
\end{equation}

> where $D_0$ is the pre-exponential factor, $E_d$ is the activation energy, $k_B$ is the Boltzmann constant, and $T$ is the temperature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $D_0$ is the pre-exponential factor, $E_d$ is the activation energy, $k_B$ is the Boltzmann constant, and $T$ is the temperature.

### Defect annihilation

During TDS heating, radiation-induced defect sites undergo first-order annihilation [!citep](kobayashi2015developing):

\begin{equation} \label{eq:annihilation}
\frac{d D_{id}}{dt} = -k_{dp-da} \, D_{id},
\end{equation}

where $D_{id}$ is the defect density. The trap site fraction $\chi$ is related to radiation defect density $D_{id}$. However, the exact relationship is not clearly indicated in [!citep](kobayashi2015developing). Therefore, the initial trap site density is assumed to equal the defect density with $\chi(0)N = D_{id}$.

The annihilation rate coefficient, $k_{dp-da}$, is described as:

\begin{equation} \label{eq:annihilation_rate}
k_{dp-da} = k_{dp-da,0} \exp \left( -\frac{E_{dp-da}}{k_B T} \right).
\end{equation}

The raising temperature reduces the available trap sites: the trap site fraction $\chi$ decays over time following [eq:annihilation], preventing re-trapping into annihilated sites. This is implemented by solving the annihilation equation self-consistently as an additional variable within the simulation, using a `ReleasingNodalKernel`.
```

### Trapping and Detrapping

Only O$^{-}$-center (hydroxyl group) trapping is included in this model. As noted by [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) (p. 26), tritium release controlled by detrapping from F$^+$-centers (oxygen vacancies) occurs near 580 K, which corresponds to the release temperature controlled by the diffusion process itself. Because F$^+$-center detrapping is not rate-limiting relative to diffusion, it does not produce a distinct feature (i.e., peak) in the TDS spectrum, and is therefore excluded from the model.

The trapped concentration $C_T$ evolves according to:

\begin{equation}  \label{eq:trapping}

> \frac{\partial C_T}{\partial t} = \alpha_t \frac{C_T^{\text{empty}} C_M}{N} - \alpha_r C_T,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\frac{\partial C_T}{\partial t} = \alpha_t \frac{C_T^{\text{empty}} C_M}{N} - \alpha_r C_T - k_{dp-da} C_T,
```

\end{equation}

where $N$ is the lattice site density, and $C_T^{\text{empty}} = \chi N - C_T$ is the empty trap concentration with $\chi$ being the trap site fraction.

The trapping and detrapping rate coefficients follow Arrhenius relationships:

\begin{equation} \label{eq:trapping_rate}
\alpha_t = \alpha_{t0} \exp\left(-\frac{\epsilon_t}{k_B T}\right),
\end{equation}

\begin{equation} \label{eq:detrapping_rate}
\alpha_r = \alpha_{r0} \exp\left(-\frac{\epsilon_r}{k_B T}\right),
\end{equation}

where $\alpha_{t0}$ and $\alpha_{r0}$ are pre-factors of trapping and release rate coefficients, $\epsilon_t$ and $\epsilon_r$ are the trapping and release energies, and $k_B$ is the Boltzmann constant.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last term in [eq:trapping], $k_{dp-da} C_T$, accounts for the trapped tritium atoms released when full defects are annealed. 

```

### Defect annihilation

During TDS heating, radiation-induced defect sites undergo first-order annihilation [!citep](kobayashi2015developing):

\begin{equation} \label{eq:annihilation}
\frac{d D_{id}}{dt} = -k_{dp-da} \, D_{id},
\end{equation}

where $D_{id}$ is the defect density. The trap site fraction $\chi$ is related to radiation defect density $D_{id}$. However, the exact relationship is not clearly indicated in [!citep](kobayashi2015developing). Therefore, the initial trap site density is assumed to equal the defect density with $\chi(0)N = D_{id}$.

The annihilation rate coefficient, $k_{dp-da}$, is described as:

\begin{equation} \label{eq:annihilation_rate}
k_{dp-da} = k_{dp-da,0} \exp \left( -\frac{E_{dp-da}}{k_B T} \right).
\end{equation}

> The raising temperature reduces the available trap sites: the trap site fraction $\chi$ decays over time following [eq:annihilation], preventing re-trapping into annihilated sites. This is implemented by solving the annihilation equation self-consistently as an additional variable within the simulation, using a `ReleasingNodalKernel`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

| Parameter | Description | Value | Units | Reference |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| $r_g$ | Grain radius | 1.5 | $\mu$m | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) |
| $D_0$ | Diffusivity pre-exponential | 6.9 $\times 10^{-7}$ | m$^2$/s | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 11 |
| $E_d$ | Diffusion activation energy | 1.07 | eV | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 11 |
| $\alpha_{r0}$ | detrapping prefactor | 4.1 $\times 10^{6}$ | s$^{-1}$ | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 13 |
| $\epsilon_r$ | detrapping energy | 1.19 | eV | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 13 |
| $\alpha_{t0}$ | Trapping prefactor | 4.2 $\times 10^{8}$ | s$^{-1}$ | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 21 |
| $\epsilon_t$ | Trapping energy | 1.04 | eV | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 21 |
| $k_{dp-da,0}$ | Annihilation prefactor | 1.0 $\times 10^{2}$ | s$^{-1}$ | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 18 |
| $E_{dp-da}$ | Annihilation energy | 0.9 | eV | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Eq. 18 |
| $N$ | Lattice density | 1.88 $\times 10^{28}$ | m$^{-3}$ | Calculated |
| $\beta$ | TDS heating rate | 5 | K/min | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) |

> | $k_B$ | Boltzmann constant | 1.380649 $\times 10^{-23}$ | J/K | |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| $k_B$ | Boltzmann constant | 1.380649 $\times 10^{-23}$ | J/K | [PhysicalConstants.h](https://physics.nist.gov/cgi-bin/cuu/Value?r) |
```

!media comparison_val-2j.py
       image_name=val-2j_comparison_sample_e.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2j_comparison_e
       caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculation with the experimental TDS data for Sample E (high defect density).

### Results after optimization

The agreement between the TMAP8 simulation and experimental data can be improved by optimizing the model parameters using [MOOSE's stochastic tools module](https://mooseframework.inl.gov/modules/stochastic_tools/index.html). A Bayesian optimization approach [!citep](DHULIPALA2026102776) was applied to optimize eight key parameters (i.e., four Arrhenius pre-exponential factors (in log$_{10}$ space) and four activation energies, including the defect annihilation parameters) to better match the experimental TDS curve for Sample E.

> As shown in [val-2j_defect_density_evolution], the normalized defect density with the reference annihilation prefactor ($\alpha_{anneal}$ = 10$^2$ s$^{-1}$) remains close to unity throughout the main release region (below ~750 K) and only decreases significantly at higher temperatures where the tritium release flux is decreasing. Larger annihilation prefactors would shift the defect annihilation to lower temperatures, but the optimization consistently finds values near the reference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown in [val-2j_defect_density_evolution], the normalized defect density with the reference annihilation prefactor ($\alpha_{anneal}$ = 10$^2$ s$^{-1}$) remains close to unity throughout the main release region (below ~750 K) and only decreases significantly at higher temperatures where the tritium release flux is decreasing. Larger annihilation prefactors would shift the defect annihilation and the associated tritium release to lower temperatures, but the optimization consistently finds values near the reference.
```

The optimization used Gaussian Process active learning with Expected Improvement acquisition, running 40 iterations with 5 parallel proposals per iteration.

!media comparison_val-2j.py
       image_name=val-2j_defect_density_evolution.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2j_defect_density_evolution

>        caption=Evolution of the normalized defect density $D_{id}/D_{id,0}$ during the TDS temperature ramp. Significant annihilation occurs only above ~750 K, during the second part main tritium release peak.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       caption=Evolution of the normalized defect density $D_{id}/D_{id,0}$ during the TDS temperature ramp. As expected, the annihilation temperature strongly depends on $\alpha_{anneal}$.
```

       caption=Comparison of reference (blue dashed) and Bayesian-optimized (red solid) parameter values. Green curves show the distribution of the parameters with top 20% RMSPE from the Bayesian optimization. The gray shaded region indicates the search range.

[val-2j_arrhenius_comparison] compares the Arrhenius-law temperature dependence of the diffusivity $D(T)$, trapping rate coefficient $\alpha_t(T)$, and detrapping rate coefficient $\alpha_r(T)$ between the reference and optimized parameter sets over the 300--900 K TDS temperature range. The diffusivity pre-exponential increases by roughly two orders of magnitude while the activation energy remains close to the reference (1.07 to 1.01 eV). The trapping prefactor decreases by about one order of magnitude with a reduced activation energy (1.04 to 0.82 eV), while the detrapping prefactor decreases by about one order of magnitude with a slightly reduced activation energy (1.19 to 1.08 eV). The optimized annihilation prefactor (~83 s$^{-1}$) remains close to the reference value (100 s$^{-1}$), with the annihilation activation energy increasing from 0.9 to 1.27 eV, further suppressing annihilation effects during TDS.

> !media comparison_val-2j.py

Reviewer: Could you add, at the top of the figures, the corresponding temperature values in K? 
See https://www.nature.com/articles/s41524-025-01734-y/figures/1 as an example.

>        image_name=val-2j_arrhenius_comparison.png

Reviewer: Please add the defect annealing Arrhenius law.

# val-2j

# Tritium Thermal Desorption Spectroscopy from Li$_2$TiO$_3$ Solid Breeder

## Case Description

> This validation case models tritium thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS) from neutron-irradiated Li$_2$TiO$_3$ (lithium titanate) crystalline grains, a candidate solid tritium breeding material for Deuterium-Tritium (D-T) fusion reactors. The experimental data and model are from [!cite](kobayashi2015developing).

Reviewer 2: Can you do a quick check in TMAP8 as to our convention for "D-T"? Is it this, or is it DT? We should strive to be consistent.

Author: Yes, Divertor monoblock (https://tmap8.inl.gov/examples/divertor_monoblock/index.html) use D-T as acronym as well.

Reviewer: Yes, let's try to use D-T consistently.

Li$_2$TiO$_3$ samples were irradiated at the Kyoto University Reactor (KUR) at various neutron fluences. After irradiation, the tritium release behavior was measured by TDS with a heating rate of 5 K/min starting from 300 K using pure helium as the purge gas. The average grain radius was 1.5 $\mu$m.

Sample E (high defect density, $D_{id}$ = $3.384 \times 10^{26}$ m$^{-3}$, corresponding to 0.018 defect/Li$_2$TiO$_3$) is modeled, where tritium release is significantly influenced by trapping at O$^{-}$-centers and defect annihilation.

## Model Description

### Diffusion of Mobile Species

TMAP8 simulates tritium diffusion and trapping in a single spherical grain of Li$_2$TiO$_3$ using 1D spherical coordinates (`coord_type = RSPHERICAL`). The governing equation for mobile tritium concentration $C$ is [!citep](kobayashi2015developing):

\begin{equation} \label{eq:diffusion_trapping}
\frac{\partial C}{\partial t} = D \left( \frac{\partial^2 C}{\partial r^2} + \frac{2}{r} \frac{\partial C}{\partial r} \right) - \frac{\partial C_T}{\partial t},
\end{equation}

> where $C_T$ is the concentration of trapped tritium in O$^{-}$-centers, $D$ is the temperature-dependent diffusivity following the Arrhenius law:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where $C_T$ is the concentration of trapped tritium in O$^{-}$-centers and $D$ is the temperature-dependent diffusivity following the Arrhenius law:
```

\begin{equation} \label{eq:diffusivity}
D = D_0 \exp \left( -\frac{E_d}{k_B T} \right),
\end{equation}

where $D_0$ is the pre-exponential factor, $E_d$ is the activation energy, $k_B$ is the Boltzmann constant, and $T$ is the temperature.

### Defect annihilation

During TDS heating, radiation-induced defect sites undergo first-order annihilation [!citep](kobayashi2015developing):

\begin{equation} \label{eq:annihilation}
\frac{d D_{id}}{dt} = -k_{dp-da} \, D_{id},
\end{equation}

> where $D_{id}$ is the defect density. The trap site fraction $\chi$ is related to radiation defect density $D_{id}$. However, the exact relationship is not clearly indicated in [!citep](kobayashi2015developing). Therefore, the initial trap site density is assumed to equal the defect density with $\chi(0)N = D_{id}$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where $D_{id}$ is the defect density and $k_{dp-da}$ is the annihilation rate coefficient. The trap site fraction $\chi$ is related to $D_{id}$. However, the exact relationship is not clearly indicated in [!citep](kobayashi2015developing). Therefore, the initial trap site density is assumed to equal the defect density with $\chi(0)N = D_{id}$.
```

> The annihilation rate coefficient, $k_{dp-da}$, is described as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$k_{dp-da}$ is described as:
```
Altering, since I am requesting an adjustment on line 39 to define this closer to first appearance.

\begin{equation} \label{eq:annihilation_rate}
k_{dp-da} = k_{dp-da,0} \exp \left( -\frac{E_{dp-da}}{k_B T} \right).
\end{equation}

> The raising temperature reduces the available trap sites: the trap site fraction $\chi$ decays over time following [eq:annihilation], preventing re-trapping into annihilated sites. This is implemented by solving the annihilation equation self-consistently as an additional variable within the simulation, using a `ReleasingNodalKernel`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Raising the temperature reduces the available trap sites; the trap site fraction $\chi$ decays over time following [eq:annihilation], preventing re-trapping into annihilated sites. This is implemented by solving the annihilation equation self-consistently as an additional variable within the simulation, using a [ReleasingNodalKernel.md].
```

> where $k_{dp-da,0}$ and $E_{dp-da}$ are the Annihilation prefactor and energy, respectively. Raising the temperature reduces the available trap sites; the trap site fraction $\chi$ decays over time following [eq:annihilation], preventing re-trapping into annihilated sites. This is implemented by solving the annihilation equation self-consistently as an additional variable within the simulation, using a [ReleasingNodalKernel.md].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where $k_{dp-da,0}$ and $E_{dp-da}$ are the annihilation prefactor and energy, respectively. Raising the temperature reduces the available trap sites; the trap site fraction $\chi$ decays over time following [eq:annihilation], preventing re-trapping into annihilated sites. This is implemented by solving the annihilation equation self-consistently as an additional variable within the simulation, using a [ReleasingNodalKernel.md].
```

### Trapping and Detrapping

Only O$^{-}$-center (hydroxyl group) trapping is included in this model. As noted by [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) (p. 26), tritium release controlled by detrapping from F$^+$-centers (oxygen vacancies) occurs near 580 K, which corresponds to the release temperature controlled by the diffusion process itself. Because F$^+$-center detrapping is not rate-limiting relative to diffusion, it does not produce a distinct feature (i.e., peak) in the TDS spectrum, and is therefore excluded from the model.

The trapped concentration $C_T$ evolves according to:

\begin{equation}  \label{eq:trapping}
\frac{\partial C_T}{\partial t} = \alpha_t \frac{C_T^{\text{empty}} C_M}{N} - \alpha_r C_T - k_{dp-da} C_T,
\end{equation}

> where $N$ is the lattice site density, and $C_T^{\text{empty}} = \chi N - C_T$ is the empty trap concentration with $\chi$ being the trap site fraction.

Reviewer 2: I have noticed that the documentation in its current form likes to "repeat" definitions for variables and parameters quite a lot, like $\chi$ here. I am trying to decide how I feel about this (whether or not they need to be cleaned up everywhere), but would like your thoughts as well.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. I agree that I should clean this up and address similar instances. This repeated definition likely resulted from moving the sentence from another document, and I forgot to remove the definition of \chi.

| $k_B$ | Boltzmann constant | 1.380649 $\times 10^{-23}$ | J/K | [PhysicalConstants.h](https://physics.nist.gov/cgi-bin/cuu/Value?r) |
| $D_{id,E}$ | Defect density (Sample E) | $3.384 \times 10^{26}$ | m$^{-3}$ | [!cite](kobayashi2015developing), Table 1 |

## Results

### Results before optimization

[val-2j_comparison_e] shows the comparison between TMAP8 and the experimental TDS spectrum for Sample E (high defect density). The O$^{-}$-center trapping model with defect annihilation captures the broad release profile. The high detrapping energy of O$^{-}$-centers (1.19 eV) produces a release peak above 650 K that is distinct from the diffusion-controlled release. The defect annihilation mechanism reduces the effective trap density at high temperatures, suppressing re-trapping and allowing tritium to escape more efficiently.

!media comparison_val-2j.py
       image_name=val-2j_comparison_sample_e.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2j_comparison_e
       caption=Comparison of TMAP8 calculation with the experimental TDS data for Sample E (high defect density).

### Results after optimization

> The agreement between the TMAP8 simulation and experimental data can be improved by optimizing the model parameters using [MOOSE's stochastic tools module](https://mooseframework.inl.gov/modules/stochastic_tools/index.html). A Bayesian optimization approach [!citep](DHULIPALA2026102776) was applied to optimize eight key parameters (i.e., four Arrhenius pre-exponential factors (in log$_{10}$ space) and four activation energies for the diffusivity, trapping, releasing, and defect annealing) to better match the experimental TDS curve for Sample E.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The agreement between the TMAP8 simulation and experimental data can be improved by optimizing the model parameters using the [MOOSE stochastic tools module](https://mooseframework.inl.gov/modules/stochastic_tools/index.html). A Bayesian optimization approach [!citep](DHULIPALA2026102776) was applied to optimize eight key parameters (i.e., four Arrhenius pre-exponential factors (in log$_{10}$ space) and four activation energies for the diffusivity, trapping, releasing, and defect annealing) to better match the experimental TDS curve for Sample E.
```

As shown in [val-2j_defect_density_evolution], the normalized defect density with the reference annihilation prefactor ($\alpha_{anneal}$ = 10$^2$ s$^{-1}$) remains close to unity throughout the main release region (below ~750 K) and only decreases significantly at higher temperatures where the tritium release flux is decreasing. Larger annihilation prefactors would shift the defect annihilation and the associated tritium release to lower temperatures, but the optimization consistently finds values near the reference.
The optimization used Gaussian Process active learning with Expected Improvement acquisition, running 40 iterations with 5 parallel proposals per iteration.

!media comparison_val-2j.py
       image_name=val-2j_defect_density_evolution.png
       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2j_defect_density_evolution

>        caption=Evolution of the normalized defect density $D_{id}/D_{id,0}$ during the TDS temperature ramp. As expected, the annihilation temperature strongly depends on $\alpha_{anneal}$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       caption=Evolution of the normalized defect density, $D_{id}/D_{id,0}$, during the TDS temperature ramp. As expected, the annihilation temperature strongly depends on $\alpha_{anneal}$.
```

> The objective function evaluates the RMSPE between the simulated and experimental normalized release rates using a continuous comparison at every simulation timestep. The experimental TDS curve is represented as a piecewise-linear interpolation function, and the RMSPE is accumulated over the full temperature ramp. Low-temperature constraint points (300--475 K) with a small target value penalize parameter sets that produce spurious early release peaks.

Reviewer 2: Define RMSPE (everywhere it is first used, but noting it here)

| $E_{dp-da}$ | 0.9 | 1.27 | 0.5 -- 1.5 | eV |

[val-2j_bayesian_parameter_exploration] compares the reference parameter values from [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) (blue dashed lines) with the Bayesian-optimized values (red solid lines) for each of the eight fitted parameters. The green curves show the distribution of the parameters with top 20% RMSPE evaluations from the Bayesian optimization, providing insight into which parameter regions produce good fits to the experimental data. The gray shaded region indicates the search range used during optimization. The optimized values fall within the high-density regions of the distributions, confirming consistency with the near-optimal parameter space.

!media comparison_val-2j.py
       image_name=val-2j_bayesian_parameter_exploration.png
       style=width:90%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2j_bayesian_parameter_exploration
       caption=Comparison of reference (blue dashed) and Bayesian-optimized (red solid) parameter values. Green curves show the distribution of the parameters with top 20% RMSPE from the Bayesian optimization. The gray shaded region indicates the search range.

> [val-2j_arrhenius_comparison] compares the Arrhenius-law temperature dependence of the diffusivity $D(T)$, trapping rate coefficient $\alpha_t(T)$, detrapping rate coefficient $\alpha_r(T)$, and annihilation rate coefficient $k_{dp-da}(T)$ between the reference and optimized parameter sets over the 300--900 K TDS temperature range. The diffusivity pre-exponential increases by roughly one order of magnitude while the activation energy remains close to the reference (1.07 to 1.01 eV). The trapping prefactor decreases by about one order of magnitude with a reduced activation energy (1.04 to 0.82 eV), while the detrapping prefactor decreases by about one order of magnitude with a slightly reduced activation energy (1.19 to 1.08 eV). The optimized annihilation prefactor (~83 s$^{-1}$) remains close to the reference value (100 s$^{-1}$), with the annihilation activation energy increasing from 0.9 to 1.27 eV, further suppressing annihilation effects during TDS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[val-2j_arrhenius_comparison] compares the Arrhenius-law temperature dependence of the diffusivity $D(T)$, trapping rate coefficient $\alpha_t(T)$, detrapping rate coefficient $\alpha_r(T)$, and annihilation rate coefficient $k_{dp-da}(T)$ between the reference and optimized parameter sets over the 300--900 K TDS temperature range. The diffusivity pre-exponential factor increases by roughly one order of magnitude while the activation energy remains close to the reference (1.07 to 1.01 eV). The trapping prefactor decreases by about one order of magnitude with a reduced activation energy (1.04 to 0.82 eV), while the detrapping prefactor decreases by about one order of magnitude with a slightly reduced activation energy (1.19 to 1.08 eV). The optimized annihilation prefactor (~83 s$^{-1}$) remains close to the reference value (100 s$^{-1}$), with the annihilation activation energy increasing from 0.9 to 1.27 eV, further suppressing annihilation effects during TDS.
```

Is there a missing word here?

### Results after optimization

The agreement between the TMAP8 simulation and experimental data can be improved by optimizing the model parameters using [MOOSE's stochastic tools module](https://mooseframework.inl.gov/modules/stochastic_tools/index.html). A Bayesian optimization approach [!citep](DHULIPALA2026102776) was applied to optimize six key parameters (i.e., three Arrhenius pre-exponential factors (in log$_{10}$ space) and three activation energies) to better match the experimental TDS curve for Sample E. The optimization used Gaussian Process active learning with Expected Improvement acquisition, running 40 iterations with 5 parallel proposals per iteration.

> The objective function evaluates the RMSPE between the simulated and experimental normalized release rates at 22 discrete temperature points. The experimental reference values are pre-computed from the measured TDS data by normalizing the release rate by its maximum value. Temperatures from 525 K to 825 K (every 25 K) cover the main signal region where the experimental release rate is significant, while temperatures from 300 K to 500 K serve as low-temperature constraint points with a small target value to penalize parameter sets that produce spurious early release peaks.

Reviewer: Is the 25K step dictated by the experimental results? If so, please specify it here.

Author: Oh, this is from the old version. Right now, we use a more accurate data point which from experimental data. I have updated it in current version.

[val-2j_optimized_parameters] compares the reference values from [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) with the Bayesian-optimized parameters.

!table id=val-2j_optimized_parameters caption=Reference and Bayesian-optimized parameter values.
| Parameter | Reference | Optimized | Units |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| $D_0$ | 6.9 $\times 10^{-7}$ | 8.19 $\times 10^{-5}$ | m$^2$/s |
| $E_d$ | 1.07 | 0.97 | eV |
| $\alpha_{t0}$ | 4.2 $\times 10^{8}$ | 1.29 $\times 10^{9}$ | s$^{-1}$ |
| $\epsilon_t$ | 1.04 | 0.89 | eV |
| $\alpha_{r0}$ | 4.1 $\times 10^{6}$ | 2.49 $\times 10^{5}$ | s$^{-1}$ |
| $\epsilon_r$ | 1.19 | 1.10 | eV |

> [val-2j_bayesian_parameter_exploration] compares the reference parameter values from [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) (blue dashed lines) with the Bayesian-optimized values (red solid lines) for each of the six fitted parameters. The gray shaded region indicates the search range used during optimization. The most notable shift is in the diffusivity pre-exponential ($D_0$), which increases by roughly two orders of magnitude, and in the detrapping prefactor ($\alpha_{r0}$), which decreases by over one order of magnitude. The activation energies shift more modestly.

Reviewer: ``` suggestion
[val-2j_bayesian_parameter_exploration] compares the reference parameter values from [!cite](kobayashi2015developing) (blue dashed lines) with the Bayesian-optimized values (red solid lines) for each of the six fitted parameters. The gray shaded region indicates the search range used during optimization. The most notable shifts are in the diffusivity pre-exponential ($D_0$), which increases by roughly two orders of magnitude, and in the detrapping prefactor ($\alpha_{r0}$), which decreases by over one order of magnitude. The activation energies shift more modestly.
```

> !media comparison_val-2j.py

Reviewer: I love this! I do have one additional request, though. The Bayesian inference provides a final distribution of parameter values, not just a single point. Could you plot the entire distribution in addition to the optimized value (that you already have in red)?

Author: Since Bayesian optimization basically use actively trained Gaussian Process surrogate to iteratively find the next optimal parameter sets based on previous simulations, tit does not directly output a posterior distribution over parameters as full Bayesian uncertainty quantification would.

However, I believe the thing you would like me to do are 
-figure out the selected parameter sets distribution when the Gaussian process surrogate behavior correctly, 
-double check if the optimal parameter sets are in the distribution 
Therefore, I plot the distribution of the top 20% scoring parameter sets from the optimization in the figure to provide these additional information. Please let me know if this addresses your request or not.

### Results after optimization

> The agreement between the TMAP8 simulation and experimental data can be improved by optimizing the model parameters using [MOOSE's stochastic tools module](https://mooseframework.inl.gov/modules/stochastic_tools/index.html). A Bayesian optimization approach [!citep](DHULIPALA2026102776) was applied to optimize eight key parameters (i.e., four Arrhenius pre-exponential factors (in log$_{10}$ space) and four activation energies, including the defect annihilation parameters) to better match the experimental TDS curve for Sample E.

Reviewer: ``` suggestion
The agreement between the TMAP8 simulation and experimental data can be improved by optimizing the model parameters using [MOOSE's stochastic tools module](https://mooseframework.inl.gov/modules/stochastic_tools/index.html). A Bayesian optimization approach [!citep](DHULIPALA2026102776) was applied to optimize eight key parameters (i.e., four Arrhenius pre-exponential factors (in log$_{10}$ space) and four activation energies for the diffusivity, trapping, releasing, and defect annealing) to better match the experimental TDS curve for Sample E.
```

### Results after optimization

> The agreement between the TMAP8 simulation and experimental data can be improved by optimizing the model parameters using [MOOSE's stochastic tools module](https://mooseframework.inl.gov/modules/stochastic_tools/index.html). A Bayesian optimization approach [!citep](DHULIPALA2026102776) was applied to optimize six key parameters (i.e., three Arrhenius pre-exponential factors (in log$_{10}$ space) and three activation energies) to better match the experimental TDS curve for Sample E. The defect annihilation parameters were not included in the optimization because annihilation has only a minor impact on the tritium release during TDS. As shown in [val-2j_defect_density_evolution], the normalized defect density remains close to unity throughout the main release region (below ~750 K) and only decreases significantly at higher temperatures where the tritium release has largely concluded. The optimization used Gaussian Process active learning with Expected Improvement acquisition, running 40 iterations with 5 parallel proposals per iteration.

Reviewer: ``` suggestion
The agreement between the TMAP8 simulation and experimental data can be improved by optimizing the model parameters using [MOOSE's stochastic tools module](https://mooseframework.inl.gov/modules/stochastic_tools/index.html). A Bayesian optimization approach [!citep](DHULIPALA2026102776) was applied to optimize six key parameters (i.e., three Arrhenius pre-exponential factors (in log$_{10}$ space) and three activation energies) to better match the experimental TDS curve for Sample E. 
The defect annihilation parameters were not included in the optimization because annihilation parameter has only a minor impact on the tritium release during TDS. 
As shown in [val-2j_defect_density_evolution], the normalized defect density remains close to unity throughout the main release region (below ~750 K) and only decreases significantly at higher temperatures where the tritium release flux is decreasing. 
The optimization used Gaussian Process active learning with Expected Improvement acquisition, running 40 iterations with 5 parallel proposals per iteration.
```

!media comparison_val-2j.py

>        image_name=val-2j_defect_density_evolution.png

Reviewer: I suggest plotting the curve with several values to show how it affects the defect density evolution. 
Because your conclusion might not be valid with a coefficient that leads to a disappearance of he defects at lower temperatures.

       style=width:50%;margin-bottom:2%;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto
       id=val-2j_defect_density_evolution

>        caption=Evolution of the normalized defect density $D_{id}/D_{id,0}$ during the TDS temperature ramp. Significant annihilation occurs only above ~750 K, after the main tritium release peak.

Reviewer: ``` suggestion
       caption=Evolution of the normalized defect density $D_{id}/D_{id,0}$ during the TDS temperature ramp. Significant annihilation occurs only above ~750 K, during the second part main tritium release peak.
```

> !table id=val-2j_optimized_parameters caption=Reference and Bayesian-optimized parameter values.

Reviewer: You should add 2 columns for the min and max values used for calibration.
